---
title: Boolean
module: 7
jotted: false
---

# Boolean  - ( true / false )

This week, in order to began examining conditional flow, we need to learn about an additional _data type_, which we will use **extensively**. This is the _Boolean_ data type.



So far, we have discussed three specific _data types_;

- Numbers
    - `4`
    - `3.14`
    - `-10000000`
- Strings
    - `'This is a strings'`
    - `"Another String"`
- Objects
    - `var myObj = { max: "happy", sally: "sad", peter: "indifferent" };`
    - `myObj.max` returns `"happy"`


<br />


We learned that all of these data types are stored within computers as a series of 1's and 0's. With each 1 or 0 representing a single _bit_. Like the storage mechanism of a single bit in the computer , the Boolean data type is used to represent the values of _true_ and _false_  (`1` and `0`, respectively).

> In other words, the Boolean data type is the simplest data type in a programming language or computer, as it can be represented by a single bit (i.e. `1` or `0`). This means it is also one of the most fundamental concepts is computer science to understand, because all computer systems are based on testing everything as either `1` or `0`.

The Boolean is also sometimes known as the _truth value_, which is a ["value indicating the relation of a proposition to truth"](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Truth_value). This statement will become more evident as we go through the week. However, Booleans are typically used to represent whether something is true or false, a `1` or `0`, or the _state_ of an element. These value states are often set in relation to some conditional test.

## JavaScript Boolean Keywords

In JavaScript, the Boolean is represented by one of two keywords.

```js
true
false
```

`true` can also be thought of as the value '1'. Likewise, `false` can be thought of as the value '0'.

The `true` and `false` keywords are "reserved keywords" within JavaScript, as such, the language will not allow you to overwrite them. (i.e. `var true = "some value";` will "throw" and error and cause your program to crash.)


## Setting Variables to a Boolean Value

To set a variable to a Boolean value, simply pass the Boolean keyword to an assignment operator.

```js
var myBool;
myBool = true;
myBool = false;
```
