---
title: Homework
module: 10
jotted: true
---

# Homework

For your homework this week you can either;

1. Refactor an existing homework project; adapting it to use functions and an array.
2. Create a new creative sketch, that utilizes functions and arrays.

My example below, demonstrates the work we did this week in class, and creating a complex, generative smiley face example.

## Specification

1. You must create and use at least one array.
2. You must write and use at least two functions, (not counting `setup()` or `draw()`).
3. This should be "interesting" to look at.

As always, you should comment your code, write a readme, and provide links on the wiki to both your git repo, and live sketch.

## Wiki

[**Link to the Wiki Page!**](https://github.com/Montana-Media-Arts/120_CreativeCoding/wiki/HW-10)

# Instructor Example

For this weeks example, I do a number of things. However, the main goal was to create a sketch with smiley faces that rotate on the `x` and `y` axis according to a sinusoidal function. This sine function determines not only relative position, but also the scale factor of the smiley face.

As you can see from the code;

- I created an array (`smileys`), to store objects holding data about each smiley.
- I also created a variable `t` to track the progression of time.
- In the setup function, I push 20 objects, representing various aspects of data necessary to draw each smiley.
- Below the draw loop, I write 3 functions.
- The first of these, `drawSmiley()` accepts a smiley object as its input. It then calls the sine function to determine position on both the `x` and `y` axis, and also calls the function to actually draw each smiley (`smileyFace()`).
- The `smileyFace()` function is the same one you saw earlier this week.
- The `sinePos()` function determines a position value based on the movement of time (`time`) and the `timeScale` of each individual smiley object.
- Finally, in the `draw()` function, the array of smileys is worked through and used to draw smiley faces in orbit.
- However, I also included a map function that maps the `mouseX` position between `0` and the `length` of the smiley array. Thereby, allowing the user to determine how many orbiting smileys that see.


<div id="code-heading">sketch.js</div>

{% highlight js linenos %}
let smileys = [];
let t = 0;

function setup(){
    createCanvas( windowWidth, 600 );

    // create a bunch of random, sine movement smileys
    for (var i = 0; i < 20; i++) {

        // add new smiley objs to the array
        smileys.push(
            {
                period: { x: random(60, 240), y: random(60, 240) },
                maxSize: random(4),
                maxDist: {
                    x: random(width/2),
                    y: random(height/2)
                },
                pos: {
                    x: random(width),
                    y: random(height)
                }
            } // ← end smiley obj
        ); // end array push
    } // end for loop
}

function draw() {
    // set the background to 'white'
    background(0, 0, 0, 10 );

    // determine the number of smileys to draw in the array
    // based on mouse position
    // i.e. left=0 - right=all
    let numToDraw = map( mouseX, 0, width, 0, smileys.length );
    for ( let i = 0; i < numToDraw; i++ ) {
        // draw the smileys
        drawSmiley( smileys[i], t );
    }

    // increment time for the sine wave functions
    t++;

}

/* Draw the Smiley */
function drawSmiley( smiley, time ) {
    // determine the value of individual sine wave functions
    let x = sinePos( smiley.period.x, time );
    let y = sinePos( smiley.period.y, time );

    let pos_x = x * smiley.maxDist.x + smiley.pos.x;
    let pos_y = y * smiley.maxDist.y + smiley.pos.y;

    // draw a smiley based on object data
    smileyFace(
        pos_x,
        pos_y,
        x * smiley.maxSize,
        y * smiley.maxSize
    );
}


/* SMILEY FACE FUNCTION */
function smileyFace( pos_x, pos_y, scale_x, scale_y ) {
    push(); // ← Begin sandbox

    // 1. scale and position smiley face
    translate( pos_x, pos_y );
    scale( scale_x, scale_y );

    // 2. draw smiley face
    stroke( 0 );
    fill('rgba(234, 255, 61, 1.0)');
    ellipse( 0, 0, 100 );
    noStroke();
    fill( 40, 255 );
    arc( 0, 15, 75, 50, 0, PI );
    ellipse( -20, -15, 20 );
    ellipse( 20, -15, 20 );

    pop(); // ← End sandbox
}


/* sine function */
function sinePos( timeScale, time ) {
    let val = sin( TWO_PI * time/timeScale );
    return val;
}
{% endhighlight %}

<div class="displayed_jotted_example">
    <div id="jotted-demo-1" class="" style="height:600px;"></div>
</div>
<script>
    new Jotted(document.querySelector("#jotted-demo-1"), {
    files: [
        {
            type: "js",
            url:"https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Montana-Media-Arts/120_CreativeCoding/master/hwExamples/HW-10-smileys_in_orbit/sketch.js"
        },
        {
            type: "html",
            url:"../../../p5_resources/index.html"
    }],
    // plugins: [ "codemirror", "console" ]
    plugins: [ "codemirror" ]
});
</script>

| [**[Code Download]**](https://github.com/Montana-Media-Arts/120_CreativeCoding/raw/master/hwExamples/HW-10-smileys_in_orbit/HW-10-smileys_in_orbit.zip) | [**[View on GitHub]**](https://github.com/Montana-Media-Arts/120_CreativeCoding/raw/master/hwExamples/HW-10-smileys_in_orbit/) | [**[Live Example]**](https://montana-media-arts.github.io/120_CreativeCoding/hwExamples/HW-10-smileys_in_orbit/) |
