---
title: Proposal
module: Final-Project
jotted: false
---

# Final Project Proposal

This week, you should develop plans and initial sketches for your final project. You are to submit a link to a markdown file, located in your git repo, that describes the following.

- A proposal for what you want to create for your final project.
- Related and similar work that is serving as an inspiration.
    - Briefly discuss other artists or projects that are similar or influential to your proposed final project.
- A brief discussion of any problems you know you will have to solve or new technologies/techniques you will need to learn.
- A work plan, with internal deadlines for yourself and a description about how you intent to complete the final project on time. (Note: there will be no extensions offered for the final project).
- A discussion of any work you have completed this week towards your final project.

> Note: You should start working on your final project immediately. You should start working on your final project before the proposal is due. You should also not wait on a reply to your proposal to keep working in your final project. We will not respond to Final Project Proposals unless there are major issues with your proposal or we deem you final project to not be appropriate (either impossible or too easy).

#### Final Project Proposal Worth

**The final project proposal is worth 20% of your final project grade.** (Note: that equates to 3% of your total course grade.)

> Required: Please note, the final project is **required**. Failure to complete a final project will result in a letter grade of F for the course. This is regardless of the students current grade standing in the course. There are no exceptions to this policy.
