---
title: Homework
module: 5
jotted: true
---

# HW 5 | Animation, Variables, & Simple Math

Using the `draw()` function, create a sketch that changes over time! This sketch can take one of two directions;

1. You can create a character of some sort (similar to last week) that moves
2. You can create an abstract image that changes over time.

Remember, the key to creating a dynamic sketch is to have function arguments that change overtime, between subsequent iterations of the `draw()` loop.

## Specs:

This sketch should include (all of these):

- Obvious change over time (animation).
    - This means that the "meat" of your work will be in the `draw()` function.
    - You will need to use the `setup()` function to "setup" your sketch. This includes;
        - `createCanvas()`
- Your sketch should leverage variables to store data, alter data, and pass data around.
    - Remember, you use the `var` keyword to define a variable _symbolic name_.
    - Remember, variable naming conventions and style guides.
        - [w3schools variable tutorial](https://www.w3schools.com/js/js_variables.asp)
        - [multi-word conventions](http://javascript.info/draft/variable-naming)
    - Pay attention to "scope".
        - i.e. where you define a variable and how it is used.
        - Remember, variables defined outside of `setup()` and `draw()` are available _globally_.
        - Variables defined in scope and draw are only available to the function they are in.
        - Variables defined inside `draw()` will be reset every loop.
            - i.e. The following will result in the value `2` every time;

```javascript
draw(){
    var incrementingNumber = 1;
    incrementingNumber = incrementingNumber + 1;
}
```

<br />

- Your sketch should include, 1 element that changes over time, independently of the mouse (i.e. use variable math).
- Your sketch should include, 1 element controlled by the mouse.
    - `mouseX`
    - `mouseY`
- Your sketch should include, 1 element that is in relation to the canvas size.
    - You will need to use the `width` and/or `height` environment variables to do this.
- Your sketch should also follow the style, naming, and readability guidelines presented this week.

You should also continue to use the skills, functions, and techniques presented in the previous week. This will be necessary to complete the assignment (but you will not be graded for the inclusion).

As always, include lots of comments about what each section, _does_, or is _trying to do_.

# Submission

As always, you should create a new `hw-5/` directory, in the top level of your git repo. You will provide links to both the;

- [live sketch](https://montana-media-arts.github.io/120_CreativeCoding/hwExamples/HW-5/)
- [homework repo directory](https://github.com/Montana-Media-Arts/120_CreativeCoding/tree/master/hwExamples/HW-5)

<br />


These links should be added the HW-5 Wiki page, on the course GitHub repo.

- [HW-5 Wiki Page](https://github.com/Montana-Media-Arts/120_CreativeCoding/wiki/HW-5)

# Example

As an example, look at the "Creepy Spinning Variable Person" from the [simple math]({{site.baseurl}}/modules/week-5/simple-math/).

<div id="code-heading">sketch.js</div>


{% highlight js linenos %}
/**
 * Creepy Spinning Variable Person
 *
 */

function setup() {
    createCanvas( windowWidth, windowHeight );
}

var headAngle = 0;
var headRotationRate = 0;
var armAngle = 0;
var headWidth = 80;
var headHeight = 40;

function draw() {
    // erase every frame
    background( 'rgb(56, 177, 255)' );
    // turn the cursor off
    noCursor();

    // UPDATE VALUES
    // base head rotation rate on mouseY pos
    headRotationRate = (mouseY * 0.1) - 20;
    // update head angle,
    // to equal itself plus headRotationRate
    headAngle = headAngle + headRotationRate;
    // set the arm to spin at a constant rate
    armAngle = armAngle - 3;


    // *****************************
    // PERSON SANDBOX
    // *****************************
    push();

    // make the person follow the mouse.
    translate( mouseX, mouseY );

    // ARMS
    push();
    // right arm
    strokeWeight( 10 );
    stroke( 0 );
    // draw the spinning forarm
    push();
    // move the position of the arm
    // to facilitate rotation
    translate( 60, -40 );
    // rotate the arm
    rotate( radians(armAngle) );
    // draw the arm
    line( 0, 0, 50, 0 );
    // define and draw a hand-thing
    fill( 'rgb(255, 176, 59)' );
    noStroke();
    ellipse( 50, 0, 20 );
    pop();
    // draw the static upper arm
    line( 10, -20, 60, -40 );

    // left arm
    push();
    // move the center to facilitate rotate
    translate( -10, -20 );
    // rotate, based on mouseX position
    rotate( radians( mouseX) );
    // draw arm and hand
    line( 0, 0, 150, 0);
    fill( 'rgb(255, 176, 59)' );
    noStroke();
    ellipse( 150, 0, 20 );
    pop();
    pop();


    // BODY
    // boring body shape
    ellipse( 0, 0, 40, 100 );

    // HEAD
    push();
    noStroke();
    fill( 'rgb(255, 176, 59)' );
    // move center
    translate( 0, -60 );
    // rotate head based on headAngle
    rotate( radians(headAngle) );
    // draw head skull
    ellipse( 0, 0, headWidth, headHeight );
    stroke(0);
    fill(255);
    // eyes
    strokeWeight(2);
    push();
    // draw eyes based on head size
    translate( headWidth * -0.2, headHeight * -0.2 );
    ellipse( 0, 0, headWidth * 0.33, headHeight * 0.33 );
    noStroke();
    fill( 'rgb(255, 31, 111)' );
    ellipse( 0, 0, 10 );
    fill( 0 );
    ellipse( 0, 0, 5 );
    pop();
    push();
    translate( headWidth * 0.2, headHeight * -0.2 );
    ellipse( 0, 0, 20 );
    noStroke();
    fill( 'rgb(255, 31, 111)' );
    ellipse( 0, 0, 10 );
    fill( 0 );
    ellipse( 0, 0, 5 );
    pop();

    // MOUTH
    push();
    fill( 0 );
    arc( 0, headHeight * 0.2, 60, 20, 0, PI );
    pop();
    pop(); // END HEAD

    // LEGS
    fill( 255 );
    noStroke();
    // keep legs out off bottom of window
    triangle( -15, 35, 5, 35, -40, height+100 );
    triangle( 15, 35, -5, 35, 40, height+100 );

    pop(); // END PERSON

}
{% endhighlight %}


    <div id="jotted-demo-3" class="" style="height:800px;"></div>
</div>
<script>
    new Jotted(document.querySelector("#jotted-demo-3"), {
    files: [
        {
            type: "js",
            url:"https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Montana-Media-Arts/120_CreativeCoding/master/hwExamples/HW-5/sketch.js"
        },
        {
            type: "html",
            url:"../../../p5_resources/index.html"
    }],
    // plugins: [ "codemirror", "console" ]
    plugins: [ "codemirror" ]
});
</script>

| [**[ Code Download ]**](https://github.com/Montana-Media-Arts/120_CreativeCoding/raw/master/hwExamples/HW-5/HW-5.zip) | [**[ View on GitHub ]**](https://github.com/Montana-Media-Arts/120_CreativeCoding/raw/master/hwExamples/HW-5/) | [**[ Live Example ]**](https://montana-media-arts.github.io/120_CreativeCoding/hwExamples/HW-5/) |
