---
title: while Loops
module: 8
jotted: true
---

# while Loops

Another type of loop, very similar to _for loops_ are _while loops_.

_while loops_;

- _do something_
- as long as, a conditional check function returns `true`.

As just mentioned _while loops_ are very similar to _for loops_. For loops tend to be used when there is some value, that will be incremented/decremented in some way, with a specific measurable end in relation to the updating value.

_while loops_ tend to be used when there is some condition that will change in the course of the loop, but is not necessarily incremental based or the number of executions needed is known.

## In Practice

_while loops_ will be setup as follows;

1. The keyword `while`
2. Followed by a set of parentheses where a conditional statement will be evaluated.
3. If the statement returns `true` then the _function block_ of the loop is executed.
4. At the end of the _function blocks_ execution, the conditional statement is executed again. If it returns `true` again, then the _function block_ is executed again.
5. If instead the conditional statement returns `false`, then the loop is exited.

```js
// while loop syntax example
while( conditionStatement ) {
	// function block to do something
}
```

One of the things to be careful when composing _while loops_ is to ensure that they will eventually exit.


## An Example

In the following example, the while loop is used to create a random number of dots, placed on a grid, with 50px spacing.  The while loops checks the variable `x` each iteration to see if it equals 0. If it does, then the while loops exits, and the `draw()` starts all over again.


<div id="jotted-demo-1" class="jotted-theme-stacked"></div>

<script>
	new Jotted(document.querySelector("#jotted-demo-1"), {
	files: [
		{
			type: "js",
			url:"https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Montana-Media-Arts/120_CreativeCoding/master/lecture_code/08/12_while_01/sketch.js"
		},
        {
            type: "html",
            hide: true,
            url:"../../../p5_resources/index.html"
        }
    ],
    showBlank: false,
    showResult: true,
    plugins: [
        { name: 'ace', options: { "maxLines": 50 } },
        // { name: 'console', options: { autoClear: true } },
    ]
});
</script>

| [**[ Code Download ]**](https://github.com/Montana-Media-Arts/120_CreativeCoding/raw/master/lecture_code/08/12_while_01/12_while_01.zip) | [**[ View on GitHub ]**](https://github.com/Montana-Media-Arts/120_CreativeCoding/raw/master/lecture_code/08/12_while_01/) | [**[ Live Example ]**](https://montana-media-arts.github.io/120_CreativeCoding/lecture_code/08/12_while_01/) |
