---
title: this.
module: 11
jotted: false
---

# `this.`

On the last page, you learned the basic structure for creating a _constructor method_. At the end of the page, it was mentioned that if there is data specific to the object that will be created from the class, then this should be passed to the constructor as an _input parameter_. What was not discussed, was how to then deal with this input parameter data or where to store it.

To store data inside a specific object, we will use a syntax known as "_this dot_".

_this dot_ references the object in question; itself. Language-wise, this works well, yet is also confusing... For example, if we had a class that describes balls, we may create one instance of the ball (aka, a new ball _object_) and say "this ball's color property is red". In the example, the color of the ball in question could be set using _this dot_ notation, as follows;

```js
class Ball {
    constructor() {
        this.color = 'red';
    }
}
```

In the above code, every instance or object created from the Ball class would have its color set to `'red'`.


<br />

Every object has an instance of `this.`. It refers to the specific object in question. Not another object of the same class. Not another object of a different class. `this.` refers to the specific instance of a singular object.

_this dot_ notation is how an individual object's _properties_ are set from within that object and accessed.


#### You Will Forget 'this'

You will forget to use _this dot_ notation in your constructor functions. It will break your code, you will not understand why, and then you will become frustrated. Remember, when developing classes, you need to be careful to define properties using _this dot_ (`this.`) notation.

If you are referring to, or trying to set properties that will belong to an object, you **must** use _this dot_. _this dot_ notation is how the JavaScript engine knows that something is a property of a class and **not** a variable that should be available throughout the JS environment.

In the following; the notation in line 5 creates a new property, known as 'color', which will be attached to any new object instances of class type `Ball`. The notation in line 10 creates a new JavaScript global variable, known as 'color'. This new variable is attached to the JavaScript environment and **NOT** new `Ball` objects.

{% highlight js linenos %}
class Ball {
    constructor(){
        // The following creates a property
        // attached to a new object.
        this.color = 'red';

        // The following creates a global variable called 'color'
        // this variable is available now throughout your code.
        // This variable is not attached to new objects of type ball.
        color = 'red';
    }
}
{% endhighlight %}

## Pass Input Parameters to a New Object

To pass any input parameters specified in a _constructor method_ to a new instance of an object, they need to be assigned to _this dot_ properties. The following would take a color value, passed to the `Ball` object, and assign it to the objects color property.

```js
class Ball {
    constructor( color ) {
        this.color = color;
    }
}
```

The above may look funny. If we can pass input parameters in to the _constructor method_ why should they need to be re-assigned to an object property? There are many reasons for this, but the simplest is that you may not always take a property and assign it like we just did above. It may be used to set something else, etc.

It is perfectly acceptable to do the above, and use the same name for input parameters, as you do for the object property. In the following example, three object properties are set from three separate input parameters. There are also two properties, which are set from a random number generator function.

```js
class Ball {
    constructor( x, y, color ) {
        this.posX = x;
        this.posY = y;
        this.deltaX = random(-2, 2);
        this.deltaY = random(-2, 2);
        this.color = color;
    }
}
```

# Accessing Object Properties

To access an object property from within the class definition, you also will use _this dot_ notation. You can treat it like a regular variable, in almost every sense, except for appending the name of the property with `this.`.

As an example, let's keep building the `Ball` class. One quality that we will want with this ball, is an ability to move it around the canvas. So, let's create a second method, called `move`, which calculates and updates the position of the ball on the canvas. To do this, the object will access the current "x position" (`this.posX`) value, add the amount of distance to move (`this.deltaX`), and then reassign the new value back to the "x position" (`this.posX`).

> The uppercase greek letter "delta" (∆) is often used to describe "change" in mathematical functions. In code, when describing movement functions, we will often stick with this convention. When you see the word "delta" it often means "change" of some sort. In the below example, "delta" is the amount of pixels to move/change in position, on either the X or Y axis, every frame.


{% highlight js linenos %}
class Ball {
    constructor( x, y, color ) {
        this.posX = x;
        this.posY = y;
        this.deltaX = random(-2, 2);
        this.deltaY = random(-2, 2);
        this.color = color;
    }

    move() {
        // update the x and y positions
        this.posX = this.posX + this.deltaX;
        this.posY = this.posY + this.deltaY;
    }
}
{% endhighlight %}
